Using listener interface
------------------------

Robot Framework has a listener interface that can be used to receive
notifications about test execution. Listeners are classes with certain special
methods, and they can be implemented both with Python and Java. Starting from
version 2.0.2, it is also possible to implement listeners as Python modules.
Example uses of the listener interface include external test monitors, sending
a mail message when a test fails, and communicating with other systems.

.. contents:: 
   :depth: 2
   :local: 


Taking listeners into use
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Listeners are taken into use from the command line with the :opt:`--listener`
option, so that the name of the listener is given to it as an argument. The
listener name is got from the name of the class or module implementing the
listener interface, similarly as `test library names`_ are got from classes
implementing them. The specified listeners must be in the same `module search
path`_ where test libraries are searched from when they are imported. Other
option is to give an absolute or a relative path to the listener file 
`similarly as with test libraries`__. It is possible to take multiple listeners 
into use by using this option several times.

Starting from version 2.0.2, it is also possible to give arguments to listener
classes from the command line. Arguments are specified after the listener name 
(or path) using a colon as a separator. This approach provides only string 
type arguments and arguments obviously cannot contain colons. However, it 
should be pretty easy to listeners to go around these limitations.

__ `Using physical path to library`_

Examples::

   pybot --listener MyListener tests.html
   jybot --listener com.company.package.Listener tests.html
   pybot --listener path/to/MyListener.py tests.html
   pybot --listener module.Listener --listener AnotherListener tests.html
   pybot --listener ListenerWithArgs:arg1:arg2
   pybot --listener path/to/MyListener.java:argument tests.html


Available listener interface methods
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Robot Framework creates an instance of the listener class with given arguments
when test execution starts. During the test execution, Robot Framework calls
listeners' methods when test suites, test cases and keywords start and end. It
also calls the appropriate methods when output files are ready, and finally at
the end it calls the :code:`close` method. A listener is not required to
implement any official interface, and it only needs to have the methods it
actually needs.

The signatures of methods related to test execution progress were changed in
Robot Framework 2.1.  The old signatures will continue to work, but they will
be deprecated in some future version, so all new listeners should be
implemented with signatures described in the table below. The most recent
detailed description of the old listener interface can be found in User Guide
of Robot Framework 2.0.4.

Starting from Robot Framework 2.1, all listener methods related to test
execution progress have the same signature :code:`method(name, attributes)`,
where :code:`attributes` is a dictionary containing details of the event. The
following table lists all the available methods in the listener interface, and
the contents of the :code:`attributes` dictionary, where applicable. Keys of
the dictionary are strings. All of these methods have also camelCase aliases.
Thus, for example, :code:`startSuite` is a synonym to :code:`start_suite`. 
 
.. table:: Available methods in the listener interface
   :class: tabular

   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   |    Method     |    Arguments     |             Attributes/Explanation               |
   +===============+==================+==================================================+
   | start_suite   | name, attributes | Keys in the attributes dictionary:               |
   |               |                  |  * 'doc': suite documentation, may be empty      |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | end_suite     | name, attributes | Keys in the attributes dictionary:               |
   |               |                  |  * 'status': either PASS or FAIL.                |
   |               |                  |  * 'message': suite statistics and an error      |
   |               |                  |    message, if the suite setup or teardown has   | 
   |               |                  |    failed                                        |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | start_test    | name, attributes | Keys in the attributes dictionary:               | 
   |               |                  |  * 'doc': test documentation,  may be empty.     |
   |               |                  |  * 'tags': contains the tags of the              |
   |               |                  |    test case, given as a list of strings.        |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | end_test      | name, attributes | Keys in the attributes dictionary:               | 
   |               |                  |  * 'status': either PASS or FAIL.                |
   |               |                  |  * 'message': contains an error message, if the  |
   |               |                  |    test has failed and is empty otherwise.       |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | start_keyword | name, attributes | Keys in the attributes dictionary:               | 
   |               |                  |  * 'args': keyword arguments, a list of strings. |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | end_keyword   | name, attributes | Keys in the attributes dictionary:               | 
   |               |                  |   * 'status': either PASS or FAIL.               |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | output_file   | path             | Called when writing to an output file is         |
   |               |                  | finished. The path is an absolute path to the    |
   |               |                  | file. When `outputs are split`_, called for each |
   |               |                  | finished file.                                   |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | log_file      | path             | Called when writing to a log file is             |
   |               |                  | finished. The path is an absolute path to the    |
   |               |                  | file. When `outputs are split`_, called for each |
   |               |                  | finished file.                                   |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | report_file   | path             | Called when writing to a report file is          |
   |               |                  | finished. The path is an absolute path to the    |
   |               |                  | file.                                            |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | summary_file  | path             | Called when writing to a summary file is         |
   |               |                  | finished. The path is an absolute path to the    |
   |               |                  | file.                                            |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | debug_file    | path             | Called when writing to a debug file is           |
   |               |                  | finished. The path is an absolute path to the    |
   |               |                  | file.                                            |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
   | close         |                  | Called after all test suites, and test cases in  |
   |               |                  | them, have been executed.                        |
   +---------------+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+

.. _outputs are split: `Splitting outputs`_

The available methods and their arguments are also shown in a formal Java
interface specification below. Contents of the :code:`java.util.Map attributes` are
as in the table above.  It should be remembered that a listener *does not* need
to implement any explicit interface or have all these methods.

.. sourcecode:: java

   public interface RobotListenerInterface {

       void startSuite(String name, java.util.Map attributes);

       void endSuite(String name, java.util.Map attributes);

       void startTest(String name, java.util.Map attributes);

       void endTest(String name, java.util.Map attributes);

       void startKeyword(String name, java.util.Map attributes);

       void endKeyword(String name, java.util.Map attributes);

       void outputFile(String path);

       void logFile(String path);

       void reportFile(String path);

       void summaryFile(String path);

       void debugFile(String path);

       void close();
   }


Listener examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first simple example is implemented in a Python module. It mainly
illustrates that using the listener interface is not very complicated.

.. sourcecode:: python

   def start_test(name, attrs):
       print 'Executing test %s' % name
       
   def start_keyword(name, attrs):
       print 'Executing keyword %s with arguments %s' % (name, attrs['args'])

   def log_file(path):
       print 'Test log available at %s' % path

   def close():
       print 'All tests executed'


The second example, which still uses Python, is slightly more complicated. It
writes all the information it gets into a text file in a temporary directory
without much formatting. The filename may be given from the command line, but
also has a default value. Note that in real usage, the `debug file`_
functionality available through the command line option :opt:`--debugfile` is
probably more useful than this example.

.. sourcecode:: python

   import os.path
   import tempfile


   class PythonListener:
    
       def __init__(self, filename='listen.txt'):
           outpath = os.path.join(tempfile.gettempdir(), filename)
           self.outfile = open(outpath, 'w')
        
       def start_suite(self, name, attrs):
           self.outfile.write("%s '%s'\n" % (name, attrs['doc']))
        
       def start_test(self, name, attrs):
           tags = ' '.join(attrs['tags'])
           self.outfile.write("- %s '%s' [ %s ] :: " % (name, attrs['doc'], tags))
        
       def end_test(self, name, attrs):
           if attrs['status'] == 'PASS':
               self.outfile.write('PASS\n')
           else:
               self.outfile.write('FAIL: %s\n' % attrs['message'])
            
        def end_suite(self, name, attrs):
            self.outfile.write('%s\n%s\n' % (attrs['status'], attrs['message']))
            
        def close(self):
            self.outfile.close()


The third example implements the same functionality as the previous one, but uses Java instead of Python.

.. sourcecode:: java

   import java.io.*;
   import java.util.Map;
   import java.util.List;


   public class JavaListener {
   
       public static final String DEFAULT_FILENAME = "listen_java.txt";
       private BufferedWriter outfile = null;

       public JavaListener() throws IOException {
           this(DEFAULT_FILENAME);
       }
   
       public JavaListener(String filename) throws IOException {
           String tmpdir = System.getProperty("java.io.tmpdir");
           String sep = System.getProperty("file.separator");
           String outpath = tmpdir + sep + filename; 
           outfile = new BufferedWriter(new FileWriter(outpath));
       }
   
       public void startSuite(String name, Map attrs) throws IOException {
           outfile.write(name + " '" + attrs.get("doc") + "'\n");
       }

       public void startTest(String name, Map attrs) throws IOException {
           outfile.write("- " + name + " '" + attrs.get("doc") + "' [ ");
           List tags = (List)attrs.get("tags");
           for (int i=0; i < tags.size(); i++) {
              outfile.write(tags.get(i) + " ");
           }
           outfile.write(" ] :: ");
       }
   
       public void endTest(String name, Map attrs) throws IOException {
           String status = attrs.get("status").toString();
           if (status.equals("PASS")) {
               outfile.write("PASS\n");
           }
           else {
               outfile.write("FAIL: " + attrs.get("message") + "\n");
           }
       }
      
       public void endSuite(String name, Map attrs) throws IOException {
           outfile.write(attrs.get("status") + "\n" + attrs.get("message") + "\n");
       }
   
       public void close() throws IOException {
           outfile.close();
       }

   }
